---
layout: post
title:  "Arctic Geotraces 2015 Letter from Jim Swift, CTD/hydrographic Scientist, 10"
date:   2015-10-12
categories: geotraces healy swift
---
## HLY1502 letter 10 from Jim Swift

### final letter from sea
* Sunday, 11 October 2015, 3:00 pm, local date and time (2300 11 October UTC)
* 54.3°N, 166.4°W (about 26 miles north of Dutch Harbor in the Aleutian Islands)
* air 6 degC / 43 degF
* water 9 degC / 48 degF
* wind 26 knots from W
* on final approach to Dutch Harbor, Alaska

Dear Family, Friends, and Colleagues,

Our final days of oceanographic work on HLY-1502 continued the
wait-for-a-weather-window theme of the previous week, although science
operations transpired without incident during the times we were able to
work. Working over the stern - required at Geotraces station locations -
was restricted to wind and sea conditions unlikely to result in problems
with the oceanographic cables, and with fall storms in the area those
times were fewer than hoped. But Geotraces did manage a sequence of
three continental slope stations (at 3465, 1000, and 85 meters water
depth) and a 35 meter deep continental shelf station. The CTD/rosette
casts my team carries out use the starboard A-frame. From there we can
work in a somewhat broader weather window and so we were able to add
casts at 2600, 1600, 500, 300, 160, and 68 meters deep. Overall these
sum to a fine cross-section of measurements over the abrupt Canada Basin
- continental slope - Beaufort shelf transitions.

The ODF CTD/rosette program (my program) went well right to the end.
Over the course of a 64-day expedition there were very few rosette
problems, the analysts maintained outstanding data quality (there were
only a few nutrients or oxygen values coded 'bad' out of thousands the
entire cruise), and there was excellent attention to data processing.
The CTD/hydrographic data the science teams will carry home is ready for
initial research use, with little change expected from the few final
data processing steps remaining ashore.

Following completion of the oceanographic work, after waiting a bit for
acceptable flying weather, two officials from the Department of Homeland
Security (which includes the Coast Guard) were brought out by helicopter
from Barrow to ride the ship to Dutch Harbor. The next day a crew member
was flown ashore for medical attention, and then the Healy began a fast
transit south. (See photo of helicopter operations.) Winds have often
been above 20 knots, and there was a stretch where sustained winds of
about 40 knots were recorded, but fortune has smiled upon us: the winds
have been behind us, giving us a fast and relatively comfortable
"downhill" ride almost all the way.

In the early parts of the past week, there were partly clear nights
several times, with active auroras. Even the somewhat rarer pinkish
aurora was seen (see attached photo).

Last night the science team cooked dinner. The Healy has an excellent
galley staff, but we held our own with a meal of coq au vin (for which
we used the last of the ship's onions and carrots), rice, grilled corn,
macaroni and cheese, dinner rolls (which I helped make), and ice cream
cookie sandwiches. It was a fun time for the science team and all hands
seemed to enjoy the dinner. [If you are wondering about the "coq au vin"
on a "dry" ship, note that the Healy's cooking wine is a salt-added
commercial product made for these situations. I joked that the cooking
wine was only a little less salty (15 on the salinity scale) than some
of the surface waters we ran into (just over 20 on the same scale).]

We should arrive in port early this evening, a half day ahead of
schedule (thanks to those tail winds). The Dutch Harbor port period will
be very busy for most on the science team, who are leaving the ship.
Nearly all unloading will take place when the ship returns to Seattle in
November, but all labs must be stripped, packed, and cleaned, and every
item left on board must be securely tied down for the Healy's possibly
rough transit across the Gulf of Alaska after it leaves Dutch Harbor.

I have never seen one of the TV fishing shows that features Dutch Harbor
so I did not realize until we were told today that we will see a very
much busier Dutch Harbor than we left two months ago. That was the slow
time - who knew? The crab fishing season starts mid-week and we were
told the town is teeming, the bars are full (including with some looking
for a fight), and that we should take special care. We had all been
looking forward to socializing - well, we are not looking for trouble so
maybe it won’t find us.

A wide range of scientific inquiry will be made possible by the new
repeat hydrography data. Because this is intended for a general audience
I will say simply that my program's results bear strongly on aspects of
the ocean such as ocean warming, ocean acidification, increased
stratification of the oceans, and large scale shifts of the distribution
of waters away from their source regions.

All of this would not have been possible without the enthusiastic and
capable support provided by Captain Hamilton, the officers & crew of
USCGC Healy, and the science teams. I owe them and the US Coast Guard
and National Science Foundation my heartfelt thanks for making these
outstanding sections across the Makarov and Canada basins possible.

A few reflections in closing...

I have long been interested in the polar regions, and I am also drawn to
hydrography, a word oceanographers use to encompass both the measurement
of temperature, salinity, and other properties of seawater and also the
interpretation of those data to describe aspects of the nature and
circulation of ocean waters. A stroke of great good fortune brought me
to Knut Aagaard, my graduate advisor at the University of Washington,
who remains my oceanographic mentor and stout friend. And Joe Reid
generously guided and supported me at the Scripps Institution of
Oceanography, providing me not only the opportunity to work with him and
his group, but also to study the World Ocean itself. I have since
enjoyed an exciting career working with visionary scientists and
supportive ship operators, and been honored to participate on great
voyages with wonderfully talented technical teams, thinking especially
of the SIO Oceanographic Data Facility measurement specialists to whom I
owe so much.

The plans for USCGC Healy Cruise 1502 represented a once in a lifetime
opportunity to measure and interpret change in some of the world's
waters I love best. To have now sailed the oceanographically-rich track
on which we engaged has been a dream come true, and, seeing this is
intended to be my final oceanographic cruise, a fitting finale to the
seagoing aspect of my career.

That the National Science Foundation and other Federal agencies which
support science at sea, the Scripps Institution of Oceanography, and my
family have so wholeheartedly supported me on these endeavors for so
many years is a great privilege for which I will always be indebted. I
enjoy an abiding satisfaction that comes from doing something
worthwhile, and doing it well.

Jim Swift

Research Oceanographer

UCSD Scripps Institution of Oceanography

![Healy Cruise
Track](http://ushydro.ucsd.edu/media/filer_public_thumbnails/filer_public/60/e4/60e4cb39-af3d-4cf9-90f7-f04008ee6c49/hly1502_arctic_ocean_track.jpg__545x639_q85_crop_upscale.jpg)

Healy Cruise Track

![Helo
Landing](http://ushydro.ucsd.edu/media/filer_public_thumbnails/filer_public/5f/05/5f05d7fc-f5ca-442c-bcdb-5bd77ca457f1/helo_landing_by_cory_mendenhall_uscg.jpg__640x426_q85_crop_upscale.jpg)

helo landing by Cory Mendenhall USCG
